EARLY LIFE
Philip James Selway (born 23 May 1967) is an English musician, singer, and songwriter best known as the drummer of English rock group Radiohead. In addition to drums, he provides backing vocals, synthesizers, along with occasional guitar and lead vocals, for 7 Worlds Collide. Selway is well known for his precision and proficiency in various styles and unusual time signatures, being named the 26th greatest drummer of all time by Gigwise in 2008. He has worked with Samaritans since 1991. 

MUSICIANSHIP
His timing and varied drumming help to give the band its sound. Whereas his technique on earlier albums such as Pablo Honey and The Bends corresponded to the classic rock feel of the band's original style, the more experimental and atmospheric feel of their more recent work has been complemented by Selway's transition to a more solid, repetitive technique, often featuring a motorik sound. 
Apart from his regular band duties, Selway also occasionally sings backing vocals during live performances, especially notable on "There There", "2+2=5", "I Will", and "Go to Sleep". Since the album Kid A, he has also contributed drum machine programming. 
Since 2011, Selway has performed at Radiohead shows with a second drummer, Clive Deamer. Selway said: "That was fascinating. One played in the traditional way, the other almost mimicked a drum machine. It was push-and-pull, like kids at play, really interesting."

WORK OUTSIDE THE RADIOHEAD
Selway has been associated with emotional support group Samaritans as a listening volunteer since 1991. He performed with the band Dive Dive in March 2005 and appeared in the movie Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire as a member of the band "The Weird Sisters" along with Radiohead bandmate Jonny Greenwood and Pulp frontman Jarvis Cocker. 
Selway has also toured and recorded with Neil Finn as part of the 7 Worlds Collide project. He drummed on their eponymous 2001 live album and provides drums, guitar and occasional lead vocals on their 2009 studio album, The Sun Came Out, where he also penned two tracks. 
He appears on two tracks – "Rest on the Rock" and "Out of Light" – on the album Before the Ruin by Roddy Woomble, Kris Drever, and John McCusker.
In 2009 Selway was featured as a guitarist on Martin Simpson's studio album True Stories. 
Selway released his debut solo album, Familial, on 30 August 2010. The album features Selway on guitar and vocals, along with Wilco members Glenn Kotche and Pat Sansone as well as fellow 7 Worlds Collide artists, Lisa Germano and Sebastian Steinberg. He announced a solo tour on 4 February 2011. Selway's second solo album, Weatherhouse, was released on 6 October 2014. 
In 2017, Selway composed the score for the feature film Let Me Go, directed by Polly Steele. He later contributed sped-up drums to the song "Impossible Knots" from Thom Yorke's third solo album, Anima.